---
layout: post
title: "A tale of ice-cream, pretty girls, and hill-top houses"
date:   2017-11-15 05:00:00 +0530
---
<p style="text-align: justify">
    <i>I deleted my old blog. Too many words, and I tired of it. But the following's one of three posts I saved. It's important to me to express that despite what the Himalayas ask of my assumptions and prejudices, even to the point of who I am and what I represent, no matter how much I miss the high passes when by the seaside, I'll always remain a beef-eating Malayali, from a Christian family, proud of the <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/the-place-where-communists-can-still-dream/2017/10/26/55747cbe-9c98-11e7-b2a7-bc70b6f98089_story.html">communist history</a> of my state, and for whom Hindi, Urdu, and Bengali despite being foreign to my tongue, are all equally important regional languages in the pluralistic, multilingual, and secular Republic of India.</i>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">
    <i>The nation that awoke to life and freedom in 1947 was a textbook case for what unbridled capitalism coupled with racism could reduce a people to. Under its last Indian rulers, the Mughals, it accounted for a quarter of the global economy: the richest country in the world. Fast-forward two centuries, Shashi Tharoor writes, "The British left a society with 16 per cent literacy, a life expectancy of 27, practically no domestic industry and over 90 per cent living below what today we would call the poverty line." In the seven decades we've been independent, "The literacy rate is up at 72 per cent, average life expectancy is nearing the Biblical three score and ten, and 280 million people have been pulled out of poverty in the twenty-first century."</i>
</p>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

<p style="text-align: justify">
    <i>They were traders for whom divide et impera wasn't just a cynical policy to protect rule and profit - obsessed with racial identity, eugenics, and skull measurements, this really was how they saw the world. Caste had been a stain on Indian society even before the British but it was their census that turned it into the rigid, formal structure of today. They equated caste with race; the superiority of their own was “scientific fact” and therefore they viewed the caste system as a necessary construct to keep the purity of fair-skinned Aryan races intact. Consider the Criminal Tribes Act of 1871: tribes “habitually criminal,” arrested without warrant, their movement restricted, their children separated from them, “until the whole tribe is exterminated or accounted for in the manner of thugs.” Individuals had no recourse to the judicial system to repeal their status. They were simply born criminal.</i>
</p>                                                                                                                                                       

<p style="text-align: justify">
    <i>They saw India through the prism of Britain's rigid class system - new castes sprung out of nowhere and distinctions that did not exist were created on paper. Where pre-colonial villages enjoyed great autonomy and constant dialogue between rulers and subjects, it was replaced with centralised rule by callous bureaucrats, entombed in cavernous offices, for whom India’s millions were stacks of paper to be organised and divided into folders. In this context, the census wasn’t a harmless exercise to aid administration but a self-fulfilling prophecy. Certain communities had always enjoyed privileges, just as others were oppressed, but never at this scale. They classified Indians under a mind-boggling array of religions, sects, tribes, castes, and sub-castes. Entire hierarchies were created and codified. Where caste was once fuzzy, one among myriad factors and perhaps not even the most important in day-to-day life, it now became pervasive and immutable government-sanctioned identity.</i>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">
    <i>Whether by ignorance or social engineering, the monstrosity of what they did echoes to this day. Tharoor writes, "The British ruled India just as this kind of identity-creation was becoming possible, thanks to modern developments in transport and communication. Whereas an Akbar might have used such technologies to fuse his diverse people together, the British used them to separate, classify and divide."</i>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">
    <i>Will Durant described the Raj as the “greatest crime in all history:” “The British conquest of India was the invasion and destruction of a high civilization by a trading company utterly without scruple or principle, careless of art and greedy of gain, over-running with fire and sword a country temporarily disordered and helpless, bribing and murdering, annexing and stealing, and beginning that career of illegal and ‘legal’ plunder which has now [1930] gone on ruthlessly for one hundred and seventy-three years.” He noted that the British budget for education in all of India was half of the state of New York’s. India had been deliberately deindustrialised, both to remove competition and to give themselves a market to dump their goods in. Famines and epidemics occurred with greater frequency and ferocity than in any other era - 60 million Indians died in famines alone under British rule.</i>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">
    <i>The cause for famines was never lack of food; rather, paraphrasing Amartya Sen, it was always lack of public accountability and access to food, as also inequalities in distribution, which is why independent India has never had a famine - in fact, no democracy with a free press has ever had one. Durant wrote: “Behind all these as the fundamental source of the terrible famines in India, lies such merciless exploitation, such unbalanced exportation of goods, and such brutal collection of high taxes in the very midst of famine, that the starving peasants cannot pay what is asked for. American charity has often paid for the relief of famine in India while the Government was collecting taxes from the dying.”</i>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">
    <i>There’s no comparison between British rule and any other era in Indian history. Our kings and tyrants, for all their faults, lived and died in India. Their money was spent here and, however despotic, in the end they answered to the people here for their policies. The British, for two centuries, ruled from the far end of another continent. The taxes they collected were sent to England or to fund wars and oppress people in other countries. In mid-18th century, after the wars that gained them control of revenue collection in Bengal, the East India Company was in severe debt. To redress their books they exported opium. Large tracts of forests were cleared and bounties placed on tigers and lions, leading to their evisceration. They forced Bengali farmers to replace crops with opium poppy, which contributed to the first major famine under British rule. 10 million people, a third of the population, died.</i>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">
    <i>Opium import was banned by Chinese law, so the British resorted to bribery and smuggling. It was so lucrative that their former trade deficit with China was now a surplus. Grappling with growing addiction, the Chinese confiscated and destroyed 1200 tons of illegal opium. Under the banner of “free trade” the Royal Navy was dispatched, ravaging the Chinese coast, their gunboat diplomacy forcing legalisation of the opium trade and expansion of the “coolie trade.” Following abolition of the slave trade, European colonies still needed cheap manpower, and thus Indians and Chinese were transported on British ships by the millions to colonies all over the world, in conditions just as barbaric as the Middle Passage. It was slavery by another name. Both opium trade and indentured labour continued well into the 20th century under the British flag.</i>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">
    <i>Even during famines that killed millions, grain was exported to England and global markets from India. Not only would the government do nothing for the people, they’d actively discourage private charity and relief funds as setting a bad precedent (or as one viceroy would put it: “humanitarian humbug”). In a rare instance where an administrator tried to alleviate a famine by importing grain from Burma, he was castigated by the government and the press alike. The Economist attacked him for allowing Indians to think “it is the duty of the Government to keep them alive.” The man, much chastened, tried to make amends during the Madras famine of a decade later. He set up experiments, reducing healthy young men to skeletons, to determine the minimum amount of food Indians could survive on. This lead to labour camps, where inmates were given fewer daily calories than in the Buchenwald concentration camp 60 years later.</i>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">
    <i>In 1943, as famine in Bengal raged, Winston Churchill remarked that “the starvation of anyhow underfed Bengalis is less serious than that of sturdy Greeks;” the only Indians worth keeping alive were the ones contributing to the war effort. As 4 million Bengalis died, bodies lay uncremated in streets and starving children were dumped into wells, he had Indian supplies diverted to British troops and Bengali grain exported to Ceylon. He waved away American and Canadian offers of aid, and let Australian ships laden with wheat sail by Indian shores to top up stockpiles in Europe. That this reprehensible racist is remembered as a defender of democratic values is a far better ode to the White Man’s Burden than anything Kipling could ever write.</i>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">
    <i>In another 4 years, they were gone. They left behind a country bleeding from riots and partition, poor beyond description; “having to import even a pin,” as a teacher at school was fond of phrasing. Ramachandra Guha quotes a statistical analysis of the relationship between democracy and development in 135 countries: "Given its low levels of income and literacy, and its high levels of social conflict, India was predicted as a dictatorship during the entire period of the study (1950–90)." And yet, from the ashes that were left, we chose to rise to "the most recklessly ambitious experiment in history."</i>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">
    <i>Our riposte to two centuries of racism, division, and exploitation was for our founders to go as far in the opposite direction as they could: electorates divided on communal grounds were out, universal suffrage was in - and so was what Tharoor describes as “the word’s first and farthest-reaching affirmative action programme.” This most improbable of all democracies has a Buddhist symbol at the centre of its national flag, when they’re not even 1% of the population; 17 different scripts on its currency note; and a national anthem in a language spoken by less than 10% of the population. I’m proud to be a citizen.</i>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">
    <i>The post below describes my corner of the land, Kerala. A state very different from much of the rest of the country. And those differences are cause for celebration, an affirmation of the very idea of India.</i>
</p>

<p style="text-align: center">
    <b>xxx</b>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">I know this guy whose Facebook profile (long since deleted) was a hyperlink to my childhood. Now-forgotten-but-once-best-friends; blokes I hated with every fibre of my being (and all the more forgotten for it, surprisingly); and even that girl - indelibly seared into memory as an ideal beyond anything my young imagination had ever conjured - whom I saw just once at our annual inter-school meet; they were all there in his list of friends. Now, how this human paraquat (if I may use an insult phrased by The Dude) whom I, even after all these years, still feel like doing in with a brick, ever managed to get in touch with all these people, eons into adulthood, is a subject for study by far subtler minds than my own. This post isn’t about him.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">There was this day when I came across one such familiar face, a senior at school by 4 or 5 years. And as she’s very pretty, I still remember her name <i>and</i> her face, which is more than I can say for most other schoolmates of mine. Now, if you think I'm going to entertain you with some story where I made a fool of myself all those years ago, you're in for disappointment. Four years is an unbridgeable chasm in school. She might as well have been twenty years older. <i>This</i> is more of a topography reminisce.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">When I cast my mind back geographically, the first images that flash through aren’t necessarily the most striking places from my childhood but simply the ones that were just by the house gate. I was never the outdoor sort.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">There was, for instance, what I always referred to as the desert cliff. It may be amongst the cornier of names but, that being what I named it, we're stuck with it for the rest of this post. I grew up in the suburbs of a port city on the Arabian Sea, on a narrow strip of land between hills and sea, tropical and rain drenched, with vegetation so thick you could walk three metres off a paved road and forget civilisation ever existed. And therefore, the most memorable place of my youth wasn’t green but brown and dusty - and all the more attractive for it. It was so shaped that the land beneath was cut off on three sides. The fourth was sealed by the walls of a few houses; almost a perfect rectangle and overgrown with weeds and wild flowers.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">To the west was the road that led to my house - also on top of the hill and southwards. On the other side of the road, the land sloped gently down. It began rocky and barren, save for a few bushes and a microwave tower. But it was a slope that went on forever, growing greener, all the way down to the end of the world, where trees battled skies. If you were standing on the desert cliff, you could see a part of all this, through a wide path between the walls of two houses; and since it lay westward, you could catch the setting sun too. Even as a kid used to sights like these, it still took my breath away.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">The desert cliff has since been mowed down, and the rectangular patch has a hostel on it. The land west of the road slopes as ever before, but the setting sun no longer looks the same. The tower, once a guardian warning wayward travellers of the dark lands below, isn't as melancholy, with so many little friends around it now. It looked a lot better as a loner, though. It had character then. And purpose. But what is there now for it to warn of? Infinity has been cordoned off, civilisation having swallowed the trees and the skies. The many paths through there, those numerous shortcuts to everywhere else, most of them, they're gone. Houses everywhere. And even more walls. Sometimes, there's nothing between them; just empty walls, marking property and keeping out strangers.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">In another direction was this pond with a huge rocky face on one end. I suppose the more adventurous would dive down from there. Or maybe not. It was quite a long way down. It was big, had clean, green water, and there were grassy fields on the way there that hosted numerous football and cricket matches in the evenings. Perhaps it was on that grass that a young Tinu Yohannan honed his skills? If I were the sentimental sort, I would've cried when I was told that it had been filled up to free more land.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Then there were places that are now islands in memory - that stream with two coconut trees for a bridge across it, when the jeep that took us home from kindergarten went AWOL; a bit further away were endless rolling fields of grass and flowers and not a house in sight. Where were they? I remember not! Kerala is a land in miniature. A fifteen-minute walk will take you past hills and ponds and patches of forest, but to a child each change in scenery takes an eternity. These places must have been very near where I live. I wish I had a better memory, and that I was more of the outdoor sort.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">My then best friend lived in a place which, even if I knew how to spell correctly, those of you reading would only mangle up in your mind's voice. The shortest way to go there was a narrow, winding road, parts of it tarred, parts of it untarred, and parts of it really just a footpath cut through fields. I hated it then. It was way too long for my liking and Kerala has two seasons - one hot; the other also hot but with rains that wouldn't let up for days. When it rained, I had to slosh through shin-deep water, pushing my bicycle along, on the path through the fields. It was rather hillier than ideal too. I had this joke, which admittedly isn't all that very funny, that the first person to discover the earth isn't flat must have been a cyclist.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">But it was also beautiful in a way that, having been a city dweller for almost two decades now, makes it almost painful to remember. The road wound through paddy fields, a temple courtyard, kissed an unused water tank, skirted coconut trees, and even passed through an open meadow. About half-way through, there was this little shop where you could buy really cheap sweets. And further down was a fork in the road. The one on the left went up a hill, the other to my friend's house.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">On this particular day, he was with me too, and as we came to the fork, we halted. Nine times out of ten, we'd take the road to the right. But today we were feeling philosophical. We wanted the road less travelled. We decided the path up the hill was "just as fair, and having perhaps the better claim, because it was grassy and wanted wear." Besides, we could see an ice-cream cart at the gate of the house on top of the hill.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Just as we smeared the stuff all over our noses and chins, the door to the house opened and this gorgeous fifteen-year-old, whom we recognised as a senior at school walked out. I have half a mind to describe the charming little house, with its garden to the side, but truth be told, all that is left are impressions. She may have smiled or nodded at us, but we ignored her. It was way too uncool to acknowledge girls. She bought an ice cream for herself and went back inside her house. We stood there, successfully smearing the rest of our faces with ice cream, and made no comment about her. It was uncool also to talk admiringly of girls. And then we went home.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">I suppose that story sucked. Anyway…</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Until that link on Facebook, I'd forgotten all about the shortcut to my friend's place. Maybe I'll see if it's still there, the next time I go home. Most likely, I'll run into a wall somewhere. We like to build walls, don't we? "Like an old-stone savage." Not that I have a right to sound high and mighty. If I didn't like to build walls myself, I'd remember more.</p>