---
layout: post
title:  Prelude to a blog
date:   2017-11-14 00:00:00 +0530
---
<p style="text-align: justify">I deleted my old blog. Too many words, and I tired of it. But I saved <a href="https://thebloglessread.github.io/2017/11/15/a-tale-of-icecream-pretty-girls-and-hilltop-houses.html">this one</a>: it’s important to me to express that despite what the Himalayas ask of my assumptions and prejudices, even to the point of who I am and what I represent, no matter how much I miss the high passes when by the seaside, I’ll always remain a beef-eating Malayali, from a Christian family, proud of the <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/the-place-where-communists-can-still-dream/2017/10/26/55747cbe-9c98-11e7-b2a7-bc70b6f98089_story.html">communist history</a> of my state, and for whom Hindi, Urdu, and Bengali, despite being foreign to my tongue, are all equally important regional languages in the pluralistic, multilingual, and secular Republic of India.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">The nation that awoke to life and freedom in 1947 was a textbook case for what unbridled capitalism could reduce a people to; described by Will Durant as the “greatest crime in all history:” <i>“The British conquest of India was the invasion and destruction of a high civilization by a trading company utterly without scruple or principle, careless of art and greedy of gain, over-running with fire and sword a country temporarily disordered and helpless, bribing and murdering, annexing and stealing, and beginning that career of illegal and ‘legal’ plunder which has now [1930] gone on ruthlessly for one hundred and seventy-three years.”</i></p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Under its last Indian rulers, the Mughals, it accounted for a quarter of the global economy: the richest country in the world. Fast-forward two centuries, <i>“The British left a society with 16 per cent literacy, a life expectancy of 27, practically no domestic industry and over 90 per cent living below what today we would call the poverty line.”</i></p>

<p style="text-align: justify">The British budget for education in all of India was half of the state of New York’s. What had once been the finest textile, steel, and shipbuilding industries in the world were systematically dismantled: deliberate de-industrialision, by tariffs and regulation, both to remove competition and to give themselves a market to dump their goods in.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">British traders were given monopoly over trade routes; while duties were imposed on Indian traders to use Indian ports, with special levies to discourage Europeans from buying superior Indian-built ships. India had historically been a pioneer in steel; the British learnt as much of the technology as they could before shutting down Indian metallurgical industries by the end of the 18th century - efforts to revive it were met with implacable hostility.</p>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

<p style="text-align: justify">Railways were constructed by British companies with Indian taxpayers’ money, leading to widespread graft - a kilometre cost 9 times as much to build here as in America. With the goal of furthering the economic exploitation of India, freight charges were the lowest in the world, so that Indian raw materials could be cheaply moved to ports for use in British factories, while its chief source of income remained the third-class compartments that Indians were herded into under abominable conditions.</p>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

<p style="text-align: justify">They were traders for whom divide et impera wasn’t just a cynical policy to protect rule and profit - obsessed with racial identity, eugenics, and skull measurements, this really was how they viewed the world. Caste had been a stain on Indian society even before the British but it was their census that turned it into the rigid, formal structure of today. It wasn’t just that they saw India through the prism of Britain’s rigid class system. They also falsely equated caste with race; the superiority of their own was “scientific fact” and thus they saw the caste system as a necessary construct to keep the purity of fair-skinned Aryan races intact.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Their census was driven by anthropometry and attributes like intelligence were assigned to castes and determined what jobs people could apply for. This view of society led to legislation like the Criminal Tribes Act of 1871: tribes “habitually criminal,” arrested without warrant, their movement restricted, their children separated from them, <i>“until the whole tribe is exterminated or accounted for in the manner of thugs.”</i> Individuals had no recourse to the judicial system to repeal their status. They were simply born criminal.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Where pre-colonial villages enjoyed great autonomy and constant (and visible) dialogue between rulers and subjects, it was replaced with centralised rule by bureaucrats whose responsibilities began and ended with extracting as much revenue as possible. They hid themselves away in cavernous offices and ruled by paper. In this context, the census wasn’t a harmless exercise to aid administration but a self-fulfilling prophecy.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Certain communities had always enjoyed privileges, just as others were oppressed, but never at this scale. They classified Indians under a mind-boggling array of religions, sects, tribes, castes, and sub-castes. Entire hierarchies were created and codified. As race and caste determined pay, leave, and promotions at government jobs, there was a jostle for communities to be labelled in the right categories - new castes sprung out of nowhere and distinctions that did not exist were created on paper. Where caste was once fuzzy, one among myriad factors and perhaps not even the most important in day-to-day life, it now became pervasive and immutable government-sanctioned identity.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Whether by ignorance or social engineering, the monstrosity of what they did echoes to this day. Shashi Tharoor writes, <i>“The British ruled India just as this kind of identity-creation was becoming possible, thanks to modern developments in transport and communication. Whereas an Akbar might have used such technologies to fuse his diverse people together, the British used them to separate, classify and divide.”</i></p>

<p style="text-align: justify">If there’s one yardstick by which the heartlessness of British rule can be measured, it’s by the famines and epidemics that occurred with greater frequency and ferocity than in any other era. Paraphrasing Amartya Sen, famines are almost always avoidable; caused not by lack of food but by lack of public accountability and access to food, as also inequalities in distribution. This is why independent India has never had a famine - in fact, no democracy with a free press has ever had one. And yet, 60 million Indians died in famines alone in “what one can only describe as the British Colonial Holocaust:” <i>“While comparisons of human deaths are always invidious… the death toll from the colonial holocausts is right up there with some of the most harrowing examples of man’s inhumanity to man in modern times.”</i></p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Durant wrote: <i>“Behind all these as the fundamental source of the terrible famines in India, lies such merciless exploitation, such unbalanced exportation of goods, and such brutal collection of high taxes in the very midst of famine, that the starving peasants cannot pay what is asked for. American charity has often paid for the relief of famine in India while the Government was collecting taxes from the dying.”</i></p>

<p style="text-align: justify">There’s no comparison between British rule and any other era in Indian history. Our kings and tyrants, for all their faults, lived and died in India. Their money was spent here and, however despotic, in the end they answered to the people here for their policies. The British, for two centuries, ruled from the far end of another continent. The taxes they collected were sent to England or to fund wars and oppress people in other countries.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">In mid-18th century, after the wars that gained them control of revenue collection in Bengal, the East India Company was in severe debt. So they exported opium. Large tracts of forests were cleared and bounties placed on tigers and lions, leading to their evisceration. They forced Bengali farmers to replace crops with opium poppy, which contributed to the first major famine under British rule: 10 million people, a third of the population, died.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Opium import was banned by Chinese law, so the British resorted to bribery and smuggling. It was so lucrative that their former trade deficit with China was now a surplus. Grappling with growing addiction, the Chinese confiscated and destroyed 1200 tons of illegal opium. Under the banner of “free trade” the Royal Navy was dispatched, ravaging the Chinese coast, their gunboat diplomacy forcing legalisation of the opium trade and expansion of the “coolie trade:” following abolition of the slave trade, European colonies still needed cheap manpower, and thus Indians and Chinese were transported on British ships by the millions to colonies all over the world, in conditions just as barbaric as the Middle Passage. It was slavery by another name… and both opium trade and indentured labour continued well into the 20th century under the British flag.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Even during famines that killed millions, grain was exported to England and global markets from India. Not only would the government do nothing for the people, they’d actively discourage private charity and relief funds as setting a bad precedent (or as one viceroy put it: “humanitarian humbug”). In a rare instance where an administrator tried to alleviate a famine by importing grain from Burma, he was castigated by the government and the press alike. <i>The Economist</i>, for instance, attacked him for allowing Indians to think <i>“it is the duty of the Government to keep them alive.”</i></p>

<p style="text-align: justify">The man would make amends during the Madras famine of a decade later; setting up experiments that reduced healthy young men to skeletons to determine the minimum amount of food Indians could survive on. This led to labour camps where inmates were given fewer daily calories than in the Buchenwald concentration camp 60 years later.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">In 1943, as famine in Bengal raged, Winston Churchill remarked that <i>“the starvation of anyhow underfed Bengalis is less serious than that of sturdy Greeks.”</i> The only Indians worth keeping alive were the ones contributing to the war effort. As 4 million Bengalis died, bodies lay uncremated in streets and starving children were dumped into wells, he had Indian supplies diverted to British troops and Bengali grain exported to Ceylon. He waved away American and Canadian offers of aid, and let Australian ships laden with wheat sail by Indian shores to top up stockpiles in Europe. That this reprehensible racist is remembered as a defender of democratic values is a far better ode to the White Man’s Burden than anything Kipling could ever write.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">In another 4 years, they were gone. They left behind a country bleeding from riots and partition, poor beyond description; “having to import even a pin,” as a teacher at school was fond of phrasing. Ramachandra Guha quotes a statistical analysis of the relationship between democracy and development in 135 countries: <i>“Given its low levels of income and literacy, and its high levels of social conflict, India was predicted as a dictatorship during the entire period of the study (1950–90).”</i> And yet, from the ashes that were left, we chose to rise to “the most recklessly ambitious experiment in history.”</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Our riposte to two centuries of racism, division, and exploitation was for our founders to go as far in the opposite direction as they could: electorates divided on communal grounds were out, universal suffrage was in - and so was what Tharoor describes as “the word’s first and farthest-reaching affirmative action programme.” In the seven decades we’ve been independent, <i>“The literacy rate is up at 72 per cent, average life expectancy is nearing the Biblical three score and ten, and 280 million people have been pulled out of poverty in the twenty-first century.”</i></p>

<p style="text-align: justify">This most improbable of all democracies has a Buddhist symbol at the centre of its national flag, when they’re not even 1% of the population; 17 different scripts on its currency note; and a national anthem in a language spoken by less than 10% of the population. I’m proud to be a citizen.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">The next post describes my corner of the land, Kerala. A state very different from much of the rest of the country. And those differences are cause for celebration, an affirmation of the very idea of India.</p>

<p style="text-align: center">
    <b>xxx</b>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify"><i>Where there are quotes without attribution, it’s usually a reference to Shashi Tharoor’s “<a href='https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/32618967-an-era-of-darkness'>An Era of Darkness</a>” - as is most of this post - but there are other sources, too, so mistakes above are likely mine and not his. The book expands upon <a href='https://vimeo.com/133904367'>his speech</a> at the Oxford Union debate in 2015. The other book I’d like to plug for no reason other than that it’s vaguely topical is Ramachandra Guha’s “<a href='https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/356824.India_After_Gandhi'>India After Gandhi</a>.” Both contain material I wish had been taught to me in school, and I’m completely baffled why they weren’t.</i></p>