---
layout: post
title: The city on the edge of forever
date: 2018-01-03 01:00:00 +0530
---
<p style="text-align: justify">My second Terry Pratchett - <i>Thief of Time</i>, if you care to know - much like the first, gave me this irresistible urge to write something. Maybe it's all those behind-the-scenes peeks at mythology and the way he uses them to hold an affectionate mirror up to our idiosyncrasies. Did you know, for instance, that there were originally <i>five</i> Horsemen of the Apocalypse? Pestilence, War, Famine, Death... and Ronnie. But he left before the group became famous. The same sad old story of trashed hotel rooms and creative differences, apparently. Anyway, on to our thought for the day:</p>

<p style="text-align: justify"><i>… the smallest possible unit of time must exist, mustn't it? Consider the present. It must have a length, because one end of it is connected to the past and the other is connected to the future, and if it didn't have a length then the present couldn't exist at all. There would be no time for it to be present in.</i></p>

<p style="text-align: justify">It stands to reason, then, that there are the in-betweens: the links between the present and the later, the cracks between the now and the then, the bridges between the Mourinho team sheet and the yawn. We must, for the most part, be designed to be oblivious to these. If motion judder from 24 fps sources annoys us so, what would it be like to feel the Tick of the Universe? But then, there are seven billion of us, and countless gazillion ticks every day, and probability theory eventually weighs in. And those are the tales of forever.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">When I moved to Delhi, I didn’t know a soul there. And since stuff like finding common ground, or taking a few steps in the other's shoes, or even the willingness to admit that the thing in front of me is genetically 99.99% similar to me… well, since these are not exactly my strong points, my <i>friends</i> count managed only a marginal leg up all through my stay there. There was simply no one I needed to be in time with.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">But there was the city itself. No other place had ever given me the inclination to step out the front door and look around. My books and my films and my imagination were enough. Delhi, though, is of the same dimension where the best stories are from; of the dome of the Jama Masjid, framed against the full moon, rising majestically above centuries-old neighbours; of the Red Fort; of the Parliament complex whose grandeur you couldn't describe in a thousand words, that could never, ever be topped - until you turned your head to the right and saw India Gate. A nation’s capital.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">There are outrageously priced places like Khan Market with cobblestone walkways and some of the best restaurants I’ve ever been to, just as there’s Chandni Chowk with its famed roadside eateries in byzantine alleys amidst relics of centuries past crammed together with not an inch to spare; a city that's a stone's throw from Jaipur, from the Thar Desert, from Agra’s Taj Mahal, Amritsar’s Golden Temple, and Dharamshala’s Tibetan Government; from the awe-inspiring spectacle of the Himalayas.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Within walking distance of my flat was a 1000-year-old tower; wandering around in a residential neighbourhood had me stumbling upon a 500-year-old abandoned mosque; there are ancient step-wells a stone’s throw from the city centre. Malls are omnipresent like everywhere else but there are also markets the size of small towns right out of the Arabian Nights. You could zip along on magnificent tree-lined avenues and huge flyovers, feeling all modern and materialistic; and yet an innocuous lane by the left would transport you to another time and place, where, by the grave of Mirza Ghalib, four lines tell you, to the sound of qawwalis from the dargah next door, everything that ever needs to be said about religion.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">It’s one of the few cities I’ve known where I haven’t felt like an unwelcome outsider intruding upon a local culture. I celebrated Diwali in a neighbourhood right out of a fairy tale; I attended a book reading on scatology, one amongst a grinning audience having the time of their lives; I’d spend my evenings after work exploring new parts of town, rather than hurrying home and burying my nose in a book. I read little and watched few films but I’ve never written more or had more stories to tell. Everywhere I’ve travelled since is because of Delhi. It showed me the world.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">To freeze Delhi in time is to capture the essence of the human race. It’s us at our exquisite best and our absolute worst. An Australian who lived in Delhi kept a blog that began with a tone of curiosity and admiration, irritability crept in in later posts, and her final few descended to outright exasperation and a hint of paranoia. It’s a city where macho chest thumping and unprovoked aggression are so common as to barely elicit comment; where shaking hands with a stranger on anything financial is best followed by counting your fingers; where a summer wind blows in from the desert, on top of a carpet of orange dust, nudging the temperature almost to 50 degrees and melting the skin off your face, and winter sees a dreadful dry cold descend from the mountains and burrow deep into your bones - accompanied by a smog laced with pollution that reduces visibility to a metre and every breath to a burning rasp.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">It was here that a tiny party founded by activists won 67 out of 70 seats, a people clamouring for change bravely blowing away the duopoly of two big parties that are more alike than apart; it was also here that police and government officials colluded in one of the worst massacres in post-partition India. The capsule with Delhi would tell, to an alien race of historians, the story of a species of craftsmen and storytellers, musicians and engineers, that knew to look at the space between atoms but couldn’t bridge the gap between each other; who would have travelled to the stars, had they not cheerfully annihilated <i>the others</i>, themselves, and their planet, in that order.</p>

<p style="text-align: center">
    <b>xxx</b>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">All of which brings me to work. It was a huge one, where they took care of every creature comfort and I got paid several times what most of my countrymen do, in exchange for living like a Wraith; but unlike them who live in shadows, what I knew was ceaseless white light. A world of fluorescent lights, white marble spotless clean, and bright-blue swivel chairs. A world shielded by air-conditioning and tinted glass from that race of bipeds outside - that dangerous place of nights and dawns and weather. A world of polite smiles and vicious emails. Of allegiances and hatreds that burn bright, and then inevitably flicker and harden into apathy once you spy the cracks in their walls… but not before, for the briefest time, you feel pity, affection even, when you see they're no better off than you, that they too are merely wraiths like yourself, and that they once belonged to that race beyond the glass.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">But Delhi has a way of reaching through even to those lands of the undead. One day, out of the blue, I quit, with no intention of getting a job in the immediate future. I had enough money for a few months and, besides, there were arrangements I could make to stretch that to a couple of years of no work at all. Unlike school, where I knew with paralysing certainty when the next term would begin; unlike college where, even before I’d collected my marks cards, I knew the precise date and time my employed life would begin; unlike every vacation since, where an out-of-office message would inform the desperate (and who else would hope to get work done out of me?) when I'd be back at my desk and would you please contact so-and-so for anything urgent in the meanwhile, there was no <i>later</i> to dread. All there was was the <i>now</i> and so much of it.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">So, did I cut loose? Did I paint the town red and wake up with my head propped up against a dune, a dozen empty bottles at my feet, my car up against a cactus tree, a handy oasis to my left? Well, it turns out, I was never really straining at the leash - that awful feeling of suffocation was just the world trying to get me to hurry up.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">What I learnt, though, is that if you ever want to spend some time being gloriously lonely - the sort of loneliness that is sweet and life-affirming; that lets you whinge that there are none to be accountable to, none to be responsible for, none to feel guilty over: not the bad sort where you're surrounded by friends and acquaintances, all with a legitimate claim to your time, the kind of loneliness that ends with either your brains on the ceiling or, worse, a wedding... where was I? Oh yeah, if you ever want to feel that most worthy of all human feelings, you must do so in winter, in a city.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">The country isn't a place to be lonely. You go there when you want to do things: exercise, commune with nature, plant cabbages, etc. A city, on the other hand… where you're in the midst of millions, where at any point in time there's a dozen people an arm's length away and you <i>choose</i> to have nothing to do with them. When you played <i>forts</i> as a kid, was it any fun building them in the middle of nowhere, without a soul in sight? No, that was just plain boring; you needed the enemy near you, to feel snug in the few inches of safety your walls bought you, cocooned from the danger all around.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Those were the days I'd wake up around noon, have a leisurely breakfast at the coffee shop down the road, and watch Time disintegrate around me. This was a world without before or after or causality. The nearest cinema was a short walk away; and the countless movies in there, the World Cup, the several hours in the bookstore next door; the walks in the winter evenings, all booted and trench-coated up - the only sliver of regret being not knowing how to wear a hat properly and that if the one I'd bought weren't two sizes too small, I could've at least had a go at getting it right...</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">There’s no order I can place to any of them when I try and remember them now. I would enjoy a meandering conversation over breakfast, while curled up in a blanket on my cavernous sofa, a Raymond Chandler holding me rapt, while wandering around in the night air, hands deep in my coat, studying patterns I made in the mist.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Summer wouldn't have been the same. There's something oppressive about the heat that makes winter, despite all the miseries it can inflict, a better companion - with the temperature a couple of degrees above zero; my cozy flat with its warm, yellow light and my books and my movies attractively lit by the side of the sofa...</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">But this isn't really a story of forever, more of a detour around the edge of it. A day had to come when I'd snap out of it. I don't know what made me do it. Most likely it was my bank balance rapidly approaching the red line... And right there's the tragedy of flesh and blood - so few of us are Bertie Woosters and even of those virtually none can be alone indefinitely.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify"><b>P.S.</b> - I stole the title shamelessly from <i>Star Trek</i>. I make no apologies. Data and Spock would understand.</p>