---
layout: post
title: To the roof of the world!
date: 2018-01-24 13:00:00 +0530
---
<p style="text-align: justify">The big iron bird hung in the sky, the sun glinting off its white metallic hull. It was everything the dominant species on this planet under observation had ever dreamt of - to sprout wings, sometimes of wax, and to touch the sun - but here amidst row upon row of snow-capped peaks glittering a thousand times brighter, stretching from horizon to horizon - north to south, east to west -  it didn’t even have the significance of a speck of dust.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">We’ll study its journeyers instead for a better story. We float down alongside and draw up against one of the tiny windows. The bespectacled face staring out at us (though we’re invisible to it) is anxious, pensive. This is no surprise.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">This one looks like a member of that group of wage-earners they call programmers. They live a life of certainties, of money and time. The money, they get with clockwork precision at the end of every month. The time, for five days a week, is spent bitterly complaining in little prisons with artificial lighting and climate. The only relief they ever get is in torturing their fellow inmates, mostly through the medium of words delivered through contraptions on their desk - even if the recipient is a cell-mate and they could just as easily turn around and talk to them - or that higher, subtler form they call <i>meetings</i>, where several little cells empty into a larger cell and one sentence is re-arranged for an hour-and-a-half by every one of them.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">They read little, travel even less, and at the end of the fifth day they’re paroled for the weekend, which they spend imbibing various honey-coloured drinks. Of course, these are mere patterns: sometimes the parole is longer, and sometimes giant red bulbs glow all over and the words <i>production alert</i> blare on loudspeakers throughout the glass abode and their weekend pass is revoked. But, such as it is, this is their life.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">This particular specimen is fairly typical. What he’s called travel up till now, whatever little of it, were planned to exhaustion: every night’s stay, every mode of travel, oftentimes every hour of every day too. This then is a bit of a journey into the unknown for him. Why this experiment, you ask? Who knows? We may read their memories but not their hearts. Maybe it’s this very question that’s the cause of his anxiety. Or maybe it’s the sudden roar of the engines, as it begins a free fall toward an impossibly tiny clearing in the midst of the mountains.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">But wait, this is no way to tell a story. Every story must have a beginning, a middle, and an end, and unless you be a prickly French filmmaker, it’s usually best to tell it in that order. This story is mostly one of geography, though; one which we could survey by ourselves if we so chose. But we have far more impressive sights where we come from and our eyes see differently from his: facts do not make a story, a point of view does. And this is his.</p>

<p style="text-align: center">
    <b>xxx</b>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">His trip began in a little sunburned city, ten degrees north of the equator, on the coast of the Arabian Sea. 2500 kilometres were on rail, a 38-hour trip, with the first half along the Konkan coast. The train sped along the hills, seas to the left and forests to the right, through never-ending tunnels that cut short a previously much longer journey; one of the prettier rail journeys you could take and a marvel of engineering.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">The second leg of the trip, to Leh, began at dawn from Delhi - a much shorter trip of 600 kilometres or so, only an hour by flight over the Himalayas. There was another way in, a beautiful, if harrowing, two-day drive through mountain passes; a narrow, bumpy road, maintained by the army for transporting supplies, and reaching heights of 5300 metres without so much as a handrail on the side. But he gets motion sick even on the straight roads of the plains, and so the flight it was.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">As soon as the plane left Delhi, clouds took over. Mountain-shaped, with scarcely a gap in them to let the earth through, they formed their own ranges in the sky. Rather threw him off, too. He’d see an ominous grey shape in the distance, sloping down toward the earth, and imagine it to be the start of the Himalayas. But on closer inspection, no, just a cloud.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">So imperceptibly did the Himalayas creep up on him that at first he didn’t notice the dark shapes visible through the occasional cracks in the white carpet below him. But as the carpet started to thin, he had his first glimpse. Dark brown, almost black, like the slopes of Mount Doom. They covered the whole world. It was beyond belief, the immensity of them - it wasn’t a range, it was a whole forest of mountains, as thick as the trees on the hills of the Konkan coast. There was hardly a space between them, neither valley nor river. Just barren, dark rock, as far as the eye could see.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">In a while the greying peaks were craggier and taller, scraping the bottom of this aircraft at 29,000 feet. You could, he imagined, jump onto one of them quite safely, and slide whee-eee down the snow. There were huge crater-like hollows bordered by half a dozen peaks, filled with snow, not solid but soft like cream, with the same ever-shifting shapelessness, rising here, dipping there, and altogether wholly irresistible. The mountains were now more spread out. The rivers that flowed through their valleys, though, were not liquid but of mist.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">This too would change in a while. The peaks, with the white at the top and the dark at the bottom, gave way to white in its entirety. There were no longer any craggy peaks or valleys but only dunes in a white desert, all rounded, no longer sharp, with the dark nowhere to be seen at all.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">As Leh neared, the dark snowless ranges made a reappearance. The difference, though, was that this time thick, grey clouds were flowing through them. And what a sight that was! They were just like a river, mostly flowing around but sometimes jumping smoothly over the peaks.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Almost without warning, the pilot mumbled something about descending and the engines roared like never before. <i>Descent</i> may have been the pilot’s choice of vocabulary but <i>plummet</i> seemed a more accurate description to the programmer. By the time he’d caught his breath all he could see was a wall of rock through the window. He had to slump low in his seat to catch a glimpse of the mountain tops at all. The plane was heading for a gap in mountains, a U-turn, wings dodging rock. Ahead was the narrowest of valleys shared with a blue river; and it was then that he truly grasped where he was heading to: the feeling was one of claustrophobia - that tiny sliver of land, imprisoned by these gigantic walls of rock.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Spontaneous applause in the cabin, heartfelt, as they touched down. As he got off the plane, on this runway at 3500 metres, he’d half expected his insides to get sucked out of his ears and nose, but no, the difference in air pressure wasn’t noticeable. What was noticeable, though, was the cold - especially for someone who’d spent the previous three months in a tropical sea-side city.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Happy to feel solid earth beneath his boots, he studied the mountains all round, looking for monasteries, particularly the one he’d read about that directly overlooked the runway. The mountains took up all 360 degrees of his view, the first circle in layer after layer of rock over hundreds of kilometres that he'd crossed to get there. He was marooned in the land of monks, stupas, and snow leopards. On the roof of the world, without a stairway in sight.</p>

<p style="text-align: center">
    <b>xxx</b>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">He wouldn’t go back for another six months, choosing to remain unemployed for well over a year. As a kid, afraid of heights, even the lowest branch of a mango tree was out of bounds. But he’d soon hike all the way to the top of a 6150-metre peak. His mouth agape on the flight in, he resolved to chance motion sickness to drive back. In the end, the journey to the foothills on the other side took him 39 days. He’d walked every inch, even where there were roads. It was important to him that he do so, for reasons best known to his heart.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">From the almost-white, alien <i>moonland</i> of Lamayuru, in the cold mountain desert of Ladakh, his first destination was the greener Zanskar valley, with its white beaches by the river and sparse villages, so remote that his autumn trek saw a backbreaking eight passes in the first week. (Winter would have entailed a treacherous three-day walk in temperatures of forty below over the swift, semi-frozen Zanskar river.)</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">On one of those days, having reached his destination well after dark, he saw to his dismay that both families in the village were away. Unpacking his sleeping bag in the only unlocked room around - a store for dust, by all appearances - he reflected that at this time the previous year he was picking between various four-star hotels in Germany based on reviews that indicated which one had better service in the restaurant. Going to bed without food after lugging a seventeen-kg backpack for twelve hours up and down relentless mountains, he could only smile wryly.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">He took a detour of a few days to stay below a monastery named Phugtal, majestically perched in and around a cave atop sandstone cliffs falling to a blue-green river. It’s stunning when viewed from down by the river, it’s stunning when inside it, and it’s stunning from the hilltops around it; but it’s when he climbed the hill above the monastery and walked towards the lone tree standing right on top of the cave that he had the best view.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">At the far end of the Zanskar valley, beyond a village named Kargiakh, with its houses cut into rock, stands a mystical mountain named Gumburanjon. Walking around it, in just a few metres, the landscape changes from grass and valley to heavy winds and snow, framed by the peaks and the glaciers of the Greater Himalayas. Gumburanjon indicates the end of habitation, a marker for their species. But looking at it the other way, it’s the guardian of Zanskar and its people, protecting them from desolation.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">From the hidden kingdom in the rainshadow, the walk continued up and over the greatest range on earth to its green, windward side; first to the pine trees and the enormous glaciers of the Pir Panjal, before descending into the dense forests of the Chamba valley. There stood in his path, atop the Pir Panjal, a pass named Kugti. It took him three days, with experiences including (but not limited to) camping at almost 5000 metres in a tent buried under snow, abject terror, walking over bits of glacier six inches thick serving as roofs for room-sized caverns, a guide who gave up on him, a second group who were willing to take him, more abject terror, before he dragged himself to the relative flat of the top of the pass and sank to his knees to hug a firmly fixed rock.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">The Pir Panjal revealed itself with a bleakness so immense that it was awe-inspiring. The mountains were white from tip to toe, with the odd black of granite showing through. It was the most magnificent vista of black-and-white he’d ever set eyes on. An hour later, he was on a ridge perpendicular to the pass he’d just crossed, that descended gradually into a valley shrouded in fog - a lone walkway on a ghostly sea of white. Another hour and the fog lifted to show the Chamba valley as a dark-green triangle far ahead. As the sun filtered through, the orange of its setting was spread by clouds over half the sky, like in a child's watercolours. He walked 16 hours that day, gaining two kilometres in altitude up to the pass and another two down to the camp on the other side, equal parts terror and exhaustion, with just a dollop of the sort of magic that remains a lifelong companion.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">He set off again, from a town named Bharmour, this time through jungle. After a memorable night in a cave, with a himalayan brown bear atop it pulling at herbs and dropping dirt on his head all through the night, he climbed into the clouds one last time, across the pass of the thunder god in the <i>white mountains</i>, the Dhauladhar, to end his journey at the headquarters of the Tibetan government-in-exile, less than thirty kilometres from the wheat fields of the Indo-Gangetic Plain, the region most frequently identified with the most diverse country in the world.

<p style="text-align: center">
    <b>xxx</b>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">From austere hill-top <i>gompa</i> to the rainy residence of the Dalai Lama. It had been, to quote <i>The Snow Leopard</i>, <i>“a true pilgrimage, a journey of the heart.”</i> Cold and aloof, these mountains disdained him, like they do all humans. But in their silence and solitude he, an atheist, looked at the very face of god. In the fourth week of his trek, when his path crossed the iconic Leh-Manali highway, the road was no longer a symbol of romance. It would carry the gods of his people into this land that he loved. Gods created by humans to fill human needs; gods shaped like a coke bottle with the face of Big Brother screwed on top.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">He wished all these experiences would count for something. That he was born anew, with everything changed. But they’re an oddly limited species, and he wasn’t any better or even any nicer than he was at the start of it. As one of their poets put it, <i>“After changes upon changes, we’re more or less the same.”</i></p>

<p style="text-align: justify">He’d keep travelling, though. And one day he’ll be back here; to these purest of all lands, inhuman and glorious.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify"><b>P.S.</b> - We’re starting to tire of backward little suns in outward spiral arms of the galaxy. And these carbon-based bipedal biological organisms are all the same. We’d appreciate a new assignment.</p>