---
layout: post
title: The Yeti
date: 2018-01-30 07:00:00 +0530
---
<p style="text-align: justify">That it's 5600 metres in height, has a crevasse-ridden glacier from base to pass, and is whipped by hurricane-like winds, isn't what makes the Parang La the experience that it is. It's the length of time it takes to get to it. It took me three weeks along a route that few trek on or live in; cut off from a newspaper, the internet, or even a telephone. It was immersive and liberating.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">It began on the most popular trekking route in Ladakh, the Markha Valley - hot, prosperous, and not all that interesting - until a detour via the Zalung Karpo La took me into Kharnak. Kharnak is a valley so high - and wide and windy to boot - that it's a wonder it isn't a frozen wasteland. It's a cold I haven't experienced before, not even when I once started at midnight to stand atop a peak.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">But yet it's green with grass and shrubs, the home of nomads - they who pitch tents at 5200 metres with the onset of winter a matter of little concern; solitary shepherds who disappear into the clouds, a shawl around their shoulders, for weeks at a time; they who map paths on glaciers, who cut trails on mountainsides, who discover new passes; they who're the short, wiry giants on whose shoulders the rest of us walk the Himalayas.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">There was a day when I walked alone on a valley between two 5350-metre passes, its lowest point never more than 200 metres below. It was a blemishless green as far as the eye could see, the mountains on either side gentle and rolling and themselves of the same texture as the valley. Wild horses raced each other from one side to the other, streaks of brown lightning against the grass. It was of a perfection beyond belief, a childhood fantasy brought to life.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">And then I saw Tso Moriri from a distance, just a little bit of it, from the top of a 5450-metre pass, its waters in perfect harmony with the mountains circling it. There's no describing the greens and the blues of the lake as I walked by one side of it for 20-odd kilometres, my route to Spiti taking me beyond its far end and on toward the Greater Himalayas.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">But there's also a road to Tso Moriri, to the town of Korzok perched above the lake. Like all towns that welcome tourists by the bus load, it's grimy and joyless. Look at a Ladakhi village untouched by the road, protected by the Himalayas, and it seems constructed with precision, an oasis of green, one with the surrounding mountains. What transforms villages like those to Korzok? You and I.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">To see the tourists there was to have a mirror held up to me and my lifestyle. They were cold and miserable, even in the dining room surrounded by thick walls, some unable to breathe at this altitude a kilometre higher than even Leh. They’d stamp their feet in anger and haggle to get 5% off the room rate; in the afternoon, they’d take halting steps to the lake and stand for a brief few minutes in the screeching wind before hurrying back. They’d experienced Tso Moriri. It was another thing to cross off their bucket lists. The sooner the road would take them back to Leh, the better. I know my life is down in the cities, that it's the only thing I can do, but I was happy, however temporarily, to not be a city person, to be something that was alive.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">The truth is that I dislike most people I know. There are moods when I like myself even less. Because I see in myself none of the virtues I admire and instead see tenfold of everything I hate in others. We're made in god's image, soldiers in an eternal battle between good and evil, chosen ones whose individual sins can bring down the wrath of the gods on every single living creature… because that's how important we are, rightful masters of all that we survey, the centre of the universe. Within such a myth system, how do we not judge ourselves constantly, much less others?</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Beyond Tso Moriri, colour started to bleed away. With every passing day, there was less green, until it was a world of monochrome: rock, ice, and snow; jagged peaks and mighty streams. There were days when the sun didn't make an appearance, snow driven against my face by a bitter wind as we walked on a trail etched above roaring waters. And then the glacier. The crevasses on it and the path across it change from year to year, so we followed horses who have an instinct for them that humans don't. But even so, my boot sometimes dropped several inches through the ice or I could hear rushing water directly beneath my feet. While I fought for grip during the final ascent, I noted that the horses had to be helped up by rope, that one still took a tumble. I glanced furtively downwards, trying to calculate the number of kilometres I'd roll if I slipped.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">To walk here is to truly know what you are: a tiny firefly of sentience struggling up an incomprehensibly vast and ancient landscape, not so much hostile to life as completely indifferent to it. A light that will go out before one second has ticked on the clock by which these mountains keep time. Utterly inconsequential. It's easier to absorb this lesson when you're not in one of those pockets of the planet we've remade in our image. This must be a taste of what it's like to be in outer space.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">That said, some articles of civilisation fare better up here than down there. When’s the last time you read a book? I don't mean grabbing a few words off a page in between conversations and chores, your mind half distracted by the constant ding of your phone (and missing it when it doesn't), fretting about time and appointments you have to keep, plans you have to make…</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">I mean, when did you last read a book in the silence of the void, the light around you growing fainter until it was pitch black? And you realised you could read in the dark, after all; that words glow by the power of your imagination, that soon enough book and reader are one, the words no longer on the page but etched behind your eyelids?</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">I was on the road with Jack Kerouac, driving down a mountain at <i>“70 miles an hour, my head out the window in the icy air because the windshield's snow-covered an inch thick; my hands off the wheel, the left tyre still glued to the white line of the holy road. My companions are the mad ones, the ones who are mad to live, mad to talk, mad to be saved, desirous of everything at the same time, the ones who never yawn or say a commonplace thing, but burn, burn, burn like fabulous yellow roman candles exploding like spiders across the stars. The car drives us away from the people we love; they recede on the plain till you see their specks dispersing, till there's nothing but a growing absence in space. It's the too-huge world vaulting us, and it's good-bye. But we lean forward to the next crazy venture beneath the skies; for the road is life. The road must eventually lead to the whole world. Ain't nowhere else it can go.”</i></p>

<p style="text-align: justify">I put quotes around them because they're really his words but I'm afraid I butchered them. I picked up bits and pieces from all over the book and put them together as I like. It's probably not anything he intended to say. Or perhaps it's everything he ever wanted to write. Either way, I don't think he’d mind.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">When it's time to put the book away, it's time to walk. You scan the way ahead for the trail. Over glaciers, through ravines, on narrow paths etched on cliff faces, you don't sleepwalk your way through the day; when high altitudes and even higher winds leave you gasping for breath, you appreciate every single one; you don't waste words berating others or justifying yourself, for existence requires no justification and life here isn't a zero-sum game; the mountains don't stack rank you - no one needs to fall off a ledge for you to live. Your thoughts are always in the present for just ahead is a barrier insurmountable, a terrifying trail, or your dreams in technicolor.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">And when exhaustion overcomes you, you don't need an effort of will to raise yourself over tangled relationships, the concrete from horizon to horizon, or our casual cruelties to one another; no, you set your trekking pole in front of you, your hands over it, your head resting on them - and in any direction you choose to look, there's a work of art sculpted by a hand that has forgotten more about our emotions than we'll ever learn. You may be just a firefly amidst rock and ice but your light burns a thousand times brighter here than it does elsewhere.</p>

<p style="text-align: center">
    <b>xxx</b>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">A long time ago, the mountains rose up out of the seabed; their bulk forming a barrier that would bring rains to the plains to its south and keep out the cold, dry winds of the north; their glaciers the source of our mightiest rivers. They are the Himalayas, the stairway to the stars.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">But they were lonely, for they had only the stars for company - and their light fell feeble and cold on them. So they created life. They carved their bones out of the hardest part of themselves, and made their flesh out of the first warm snows of winter. Starlight brought them to life. They were pampered with the purest air and water, they knew no predators or diseases; they were cherished above all other life on earth, and the mountains delighted in the little footprints they left on the snow. They were the yeti, the children of the snow and the stars.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">The yeti lived amongst the highest peaks, far above the snow line. Sometimes on a clear summer day, they caught glimpses of distant greens and the glimmer of far-off oceans. Every year, their gaze would linger longer. Why waste their lives playing in the snow, they seemed to be thinking, when they could tame the fires of the sun? And one day, they left for the plains. The mountains wept: thus were formed lakes like Pangong Tso and Tso Moriri. They closed their big granite hearts to all life. They would never speak again, not even to the stars.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">The yeti prospered and spread to all corners of the world. They did tame the fires of the sun. They grew rich and soft. They adapted to life in the plains. But not even the plains and the sun could support their multiplying numbers. So they divided themselves into the prosperous and the proles, and they made laws to preserve this order. This was civilisation. And they called themselves sapiens, the children of the gods.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">But the one thing they couldn't adapt was their blood. It grew feverish in the sun. They looked for any excuse to kill and to subjugate. At first, they called it <i>community</i>. Then, when they encountered long-forgotten cousins, they called it <i>race</i>. When mere appearance no longer sufficed, they sought out differences beneath the skin. They called it <i>religion</i>. Into ever-smaller groups they divided themselves, defenders of the last outpost against hordes of hateful <i>others</i> at the gates, inferior and irreconcilable. This was <i>politics</i>.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Through all of it, they were clever. They deciphered the laws of nature and bent small pockets to their will. <i>Progress</i>. But it only made their world smaller and further inflamed their bloodlust. <i>Ideology</i>, <i>nation</i>, <i>morality</i>: thick and fast crashed waves of destruction on their shores, every one of them a myth of their own invention. It took them a long time to see this fundamental truth: that they hated the very thought of standing together; and preferred pain and eventual annihilation, so long as their neighbours suffered twice as much.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">They were caught in a spiral of self destruction. They could no longer bear to look at the stars, so they lit up their cities at night. They purged that last inch of purity in them - the memories of their childhood on the roof of the world - by reimagining the yeti as monsters, as abominable snowmen. This irrational savagery was emblematic of everything they’d become. They were aware for some time that they were a species without a future. And now they cut themselves off from their past. They were vengeance personified. They would make the planet pay.</p>

<p style="text-align: center">
    <b>xxx</b>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">Wim Wenders and Peter Handke imagined these angels who're chroniclers of life. They're slightly morose but ever-curious beings made out of the most precious substance in the universe - the present moment. The story of life isn't linear. It isn't found in the big events, for they're just accidents. It can only be told through anecdotes, from emotions: emotions centred on the self, emotions when we bridge the gap between each other, and emotions when that gap widens.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">And that is what goes into their little notebooks - a trapeze artist's delight at her own vitality, a father's despair for his son, a dying man's last thoughts, the pleasures of a coffee in the cold and the rain, an old poet's search for the Berlin of his youth, a mother welcoming her child into the world… These notebooks are more than the sum of all that we are, for they're also everything that we once were and have lost to time.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">No one mourned more than the angels when the yeti left their cradle, for they love children: they who ask the questions we're afraid of, who feel the magic behind the everyday, they who're the only ones who can glimpse our winged watchers.</p>

<p style="text-align: justify">To cross the Parang La is to brush by the wings of every angel who ever stood guard there: to feel emotions from the childhood of our species, to hear the individual tales and hopes of our ancestors from an age before hubris and cynicism caught up with us. To remember dreams we have forgotten. Here, at the end of all things, if I may borrow from Bob Marley, there is life forever.</p>